# Binding specifications

*Binding specifications* specify details about bindings.  They are used to guide
the generation of bindings as well as enable compositionality of
separately-generated bindings.

A binding specification used to guide the generation of bindings is called a
*prescriptive binding specification*.  A prescriptive binding specification can
be used to do specify custom names, the representation of types, which instances
to generate or derive, how instances should be generated/derived, etc.

A binding specification used for compositionality is called an
*external binding specification*.  Without external binding specifications, each
generated module contains its own version of all types.  Using such modules
together is difficult because each version of a type is distinct.  An external
binding specification allows generated bindings to use types imported from
another module.  Shared types allow the modules to be used together more easily.

Binding specifications are exposed as YAML or JSON files, where each file
specifies details about the bindings in a single Haskell module.  The same
binding specification file may be used as a prescriptive binding specification
and an external binding specification.  There is a key difference in
interpretation, however.

* A prescriptive binding specification provides specifications that are based
  on the bindings that would be generated by default.  It is therefore possible
  to rely on defaults and only specify necessary changes.
* An external binding specification must provide complete specifications for all
  types that are used.

One recommended strategy is to create a binding specification that specifies the
public interface for the binding types.  For example, it must list all instances
that are part of the public interface.  This binding specification can be used
as a prescriptive binding specification when generating bindings, in which case
it asserts that the listed instances are generated/derived as specified.  The
same binding specification can be used as an external binding specification, in
which case only the listed instances are used, even if additional instances are
generated/derived.

When generating bindings, a binding specification can also be generated.  Since
binding specifications are represented using YAML/JSON files, they can easily be
inspected or edited.  It is often convenient to first generate a binding
specification without using a prescriptive binding specification, edit it, and
then use the edited file as a prescriptive binding specification to guide the
re-generation of bindings with the desired changes.

It is also possible to write binding specifications by hand.  For example, it
may be useful to create a minimal prescriptive binding specification in cases
where it does not need to be used as an external binding specification.  It is
also possible to use bindings in a module that was not generated using
`hs-bindgen`, in which case the external binding specification must be written
by hand.  When writing or editing binding specifications, it is up to the user
to ensure that the specifications match the actual bindings.

## Tutorial

Suppose that we want to create bindings for a vector library.  This example
library is implemented using the following files.

* [`vector.h`][source:vector.h] declares the vector type and initialization
  function, implemented in [`vector.c`][source:vector.c].

    ```c
    typedef struct {
        double x;
        double y;
    } vector;

    vector* new_vector(double x, double y);
    ```

* [`vector_rotate.h`][source:vector_rotate.h] declares a vector rotation
  function, implemented in [`vector_rotate.c`][source:vector_rotate.c].

    ```c
    #include "vector.h"

    vector* vector_rotate(vector* v, double th);
    ```

* [`vector_length.h`][source:vector_length.h] declares a length type and vector
  length function, implemented in [`vector_length.c`][source:vector_length.c].

    ```c
    #include "vector.h"

    typedef double len;

    len vector_length(vector* p);
    ```

### Generating a single module

A simple way to organize the generated bindings is to generate them all in a
single Haskell module.  This can be done using the following CLI `preprocess`
command, which specifies all of these headers as arguments.

```
hs-bindgen-cli preprocess \
    -I c \
    --create-output-dirs \
    --overwrite-files \
    --unique-id com.hs-bindgen.manual.vector \
    --hs-output-dir hs/hs-vector/generated \
    --module VectorSingleModule \
    --single-file \
    --unsafe '' \
    vector.h \
    vector_rotate.h \
    vector_length.h
```

> [!WARNING]
> Header arguments must be relative to a C include search path directory, *not*
> relative to the current working directory on the command-line.  In this
> command, option `-I c` adds the `c` directory to the C include search path.
> Expanding `#include <vector.h>` finds the `vector.h` header in the `c`
> directory.

### Generating multiple modules

There are many cases where you want to generate bindings using multiple modules.
Even within a single package, organizing bindings into separate modules can make
the bindings easier to understand and use.

Generating multiple modules without an external binding specification is
problematic.  Headers `vector_rotate.h` and `vector_length.h` both include
`vector.h` because they use the `vector` type.  Running a command like the above
for each header, specifying separate modules, would fail due to this dependency.
You can use the `--enable-program-slicing` option to instruct `hs-bindgen` to
generate bindings for the dependency, or the `--select-from-main-header-dirs`
option, but then all of the generated modules would define a `Vector` type.  The
three `Vector` types are identical, but they are distinct, so the generated
modules cannot be easily used together.  This problem is resolved by using an
external binding specification.

The following CLI `preprocess` command generates bindings for `vector.h` in
module `Vector`.  It uses the `--gen-binding-spec` option to save a generated
binding specification.

```
hs-bindgen-cli preprocess \
    -I c \
    --create-output-dirs \
    --overwrite-files \
    --unique-id com.hs-bindgen.manual.vector \
    --hs-output-dir hs/hs-vector/generated \
    --gen-binding-spec binding-specs/vector.yaml \
    --module Vector \
    --single-file \
    --unsafe '' \
    vector.h
```

The generated `binding-specs/vector.yaml` binding specification contains the
following content.

```yaml
version:
  hs_bindgen: 0.1.0
  binding_specification: '1.0'

hsmodule: Vector

ctypes:
  - headers: vector.h
    cname: struct vector
    hsname: Vector
  - headers: vector.h
    cname: vector
    hsname: Vector

hstypes:
  - hsname: Vector
    representation:
      record:
        constructor: Vector
        fields:
          - vector_x
          - vector_y
    instances:
      - Eq
      - Generic
      - HasCField
      - HasField
      - HasFieldCompat
      - HasFieldPtr
      - ReadRaw
      - Show
      - StaticSize
      - Storable
      - WriteRaw
```

Details:

* The `ctypes` object maps C types, provided by one or more specified headers,
  to Haskell types.  C declaration `typedef struct { ... } vector;` declares two
  C types: an untagged `struct` and a `vector` type alias.  This binding
  specification maps both of these types to the Haskell `Vector` type.  Note
  that the untagged `struct` is referred to using C name `struct vector`, using
  the name of the top-level `typedef`.
* The `hstypes` object specifies details about Haskell types.  In this case,
  `Vector` has a `record` representation, with the specified constructor and
  field names, and it has instances of the specified classes.

The following CLI `preprocess` command generates bindings for `vector_rotate.h`
in module `Vector.Rotate`, using the generated binding specification via an
`--external-binding-spec` option, so that the previously generated `Vector`
bindings are used.

```
hs-bindgen-cli preprocess \
    -I c \
    --create-output-dirs \
    --overwrite-files \
    --unique-id com.hs-bindgen.manual.vector \
    --hs-output-dir hs/hs-vector/generated \
    --external-binding-spec binding-specs/vector.yaml \
    --module Vector.Rotate \
    --single-file \
    --unsafe '' \
    vector_rotate.h
```

Similarly, the following CLI `preprocess` command generates bindings for
`vector_length.h` in module `Vector.Length`, also using an
`--external-binding-spec` option.

```
hs-bindgen-cli preprocess \
    -I c \
    --create-output-dirs \
    --overwrite-files \
    --unique-id com.hs-bindgen.manual.vectorl \
    --hs-output-dir hs/hs-vector/generated \
    --external-binding-spec binding-specs/vector.yaml \
    --module Vector.Length \
    --single-file \
    --unsafe '' \
    vector_length.h
```

The `Vector.Rotate` and `Vector.Length` modules both use the `Vector` type
defined in the `Vector` module.  All of these modules can be used together.

### Writing a prescriptive binding specification by hand

By default, `hs-bindgen` translates the C `vector` type to a Haskell type named
`Vector`.  Suppose that we want to avoid that name because it may be confused
with an existing `Vector` type.  We can specify a different name using a
prescriptive binding specification, which guides the generation of bindings.

A prescriptive binding specification provides specifications that are based on
the bindings that would be generated by default, so it is possible to rely on
defaults and only specify necessary changes.  The following binding
specification specifies name `CVector`.  The Haskell type specification is not
needed because no defaults need to be changed.

```yaml
version:
  hs_bindgen: 0.1.0
  binding_specification: '1.0'

ctypes:
  - headers: vector.h
    cname: struct vector
    hsname: CVector
  - headers: vector.h
    cname: vector
    hsname: CVector
```

Details:

* The `hsmodule` does not need to be specified in prescriptive binding
  specifications, as the module being generated is always known.  If a binding
  specification is (also) used as an external binding specification, however,
  the `hsmodule` must be specified.  When using a type specified in an external
  binding specification, `hs-bindgen` must known which module to import the type
  from.
* When writing a binding specification by hand, it is generally a good idea to
  use the versions for the version of `hs-bindgen` that you are using, which can
  be queried using `hs-bindgen-cli --version`.

This prescriptive binding specification can be used by passing the following
`--prescriptive-binding-spec` to the CLI `preprocess` command used to generate
the `Vector` module.

```
--prescriptive-binding-spec binding-specs/vector-cvector.yaml
```

With this prescriptive binding specification, `hs-bindgen` generates the
following.  Note that names of the constructor and fields use the name of the
type, so it is not necessary to specify them all.

```haskell
data CVector = CVector
  { cVector_x :: RIP.CDouble
  , cVector_y :: RIP.CDouble
  }
  deriving ...

instance ...
```

### Generating and editing a binding specification

We now have a hand-written prescriptive binding specification as well as a
generated binding specification that we use as an external binding
specification.  That works, but another strategy is to use a single binding
specification that serves as both a prescriptive binding specification and an
external binding specification.  When generating bindings, you get a helpful
error if anything in the public API has changed.

First, generate a binding specification.  Edit that generated binding
specification to make any changes that you want.  In this case, the `hsname` and
`constructor` specifications should be changed to `CVector`, and the record
field names should be changed to match.

The resulting binding specification is as follows.

```yaml
version:
  hs_bindgen: 0.1.0
  binding_specification: '1.0'

hsmodule: Vector

ctypes:
  - headers: vector.h
    cname: struct vector
    hsname: CVector
  - headers: vector.h
    cname: vector
    hsname: CVector

hstypes:
  - hsname: CVector
    representation:
      record:
        constructor: CVector
        fields:
          - cVector_x
          - cVector_y
    instances:
      - Eq
      - Generic
      - HasCField
      - HasField
      - ReadRaw
      - Show
      - StaticSize
      - Storable
      - WriteRaw
```

Finally, re-generate the bindings using your edited binding specification as a
prescriptive binding specification.  This binding specification can also be used
as an external binding specification in the generation of bindings in other
modules.

### Substituting hand-written types

Suppose we want to use a hand-written type instead of a generated `Len` type as
the Haskell representation of the C `len` type, defined in `vector_length.h`.
This can be configured using an external binding specification.

By default, `hs-bindgen` generates the following `Len` implementation.

```haskell
newtype Len = Len
  { unwrapLen :: RIP.CDouble
  }
  deriving stock (Eq, RIP.Generic, Ord, Read, Show)
  deriving newtype
    ( ...
    )

instance ( ty ~ RIP.CDouble
         ) => RIP.HasField "unwrapLen" (RIP.Ptr Len) (RIP.Ptr ty) where ...

instance HasCField.HasCField Len "unwrapLen" where ...
```

We can define our own implementation in a hand-written `Vector.Types` module.

```haskell
newtype Length = UnsafeWrap { unwrap :: Double }
  deriving stock (Eq, Ord)
  deriving newtype (RIP.HasFFIType)

instance Show Length where ...

pattern Length :: Double -> Length
pattern Length x <- (unwrap -> x)
  where
    Length x
      | x < 0     = error "Length must be non-negative"
      | otherwise = UnsafeWrap x
```

When writing such code by hand, it is the user's responsibility to ensure that
the Haskell type is compatible with the C type as well as usage of the type.  In
this case, the underlying type `Double` is compatible with the C `double` type.
We must derive a `HasFFIType` instance for the bindings to work because the
`len` type is the return type of function `vector_length`.

To use this hand-written type, we need to create an external binding
specification.

```yaml
version:
  hs_bindgen: 0.1.0
  binding_specification: '1.0'

hsmodule: Vector.Types

ctypes:
  - headers: vector_length.h
    cname: len
    hsname: Length

hstypes:
  - hsname: Length
    instances:
      - Eq
      - HasFFIType
      - Ord
      - Show
```

The CLI `preprocess` command used to generate the `Vector.Length` module from
`vector_length.h` now needs two `--external-binding-spec` options: one for the
`Vector` module and another for the `Vector.Types` module.

```
hs-bindgen-cli preprocess \
    -I c \
    --create-output-dirs \
    --overwrite-files \
    --unique-id com.hs-bindgen.manual.vectorl \
    --hs-output-dir hs/hs-vector/generated \
    --external-binding-spec binding-specs/vector.yaml \
    --external-binding-spec binding-specs/vector-types.yaml \
    --module Vector.Length \
    --single-file \
    --unsafe '' \
    vector_length.h
```

The generated `Vector.Length` now uses `Vector.Types.Length` instead of
defining a `Len` type.

### Standard library headers

By default, `hs-bindgen` configures the include search path so that you can use
the system standard library.  The standard library headers are usually
implemented using a combination of general headers (typically in `/usr/include`)
and compiler-specific headers (typically somewhere else).  You can disable this
using the `--builtin-include-dir=disable` and use `-I` options to configure
include directories yourself.

The C standard library varies across different versions of the C standard.
`hs-bindgen` provides a standard library external binding specification for
common types, including types defined in `base` as well as types defined in
`hs-bindgen-runtime`.  You can inspect this external binding specification by
running `hs-bindgen-cli binding-spec stdlib`.

For example, a library may use the `int32_t` type, provided by either of the
`inttypes.h` or `stdint.h` headers.  The standard library external binding
specification maps this type to the Haskell `Int32` type, as shown in the
following parts of the binding specification.  The `Int32` type is re-exported
from the `Data.Int` module in `base`.

```yaml
hsmodule: HsBindgen.Runtime.LibC

ctypes:
  - headers:
      - inttypes.h
      - stdint.h
    cname: int32_t
    hsname: Int32

hstypes:
  - hsname: Int32
    representation:
      newtype:
        constructor: Int32
    instances:
      - Bitfield
      - Bits
      - Bounded
      - Enum
      - Eq
      - FiniteBits
      - HasFFIType
      - Integral
      - Ix
      - Num
      - Ord
      - Prim
      - Read
      - ReadRaw
      - Real
      - Show
      - StaticSize
      - Storable
      - WriteRaw
```

So, by default, bindings for the library will use this type instead of defining
a new `Int32_t` type.  If you would like to define such types and not use types
from `base` and `hs-bindgen-runtime`, use the `--no-stdlib` option to not use
the standard library external binding specification.

If you run into a situation where the standard library external binding
specification does not quite do what you need, you can run a command like
`hs-bindgen-cli binding-spec stdlib > my-stdlib.yaml` to save the binding
specification to a file and edit the file to do what you need.  You can then
use the `--no-stdlib` option along with `--external-binding-spec my-stdlib.yaml`
to use your customized standard library external binding specification instead
of the default one.

### Internal headers

In the above example, the `int32_t` type is provided by either of the
`inttypes.h` or `stdint.h` headers, as specified by the C standard.  These
headers provide different sets of types and functions, of which some are shared.
Different standard library implementations implement this in different ways,
often using *internal headers*.  The `glibc` standard library declares this type
in the `bits/stdint-intn.h` internal header, while the Musl standard library
declares it in the `bits/alltypes.h` internal header, guarded using the
`__NEED_int32_t` macro.

Internal headers are not part of the public interface.  In this case, the
`int32_t` type is provided by `inttypes.h` and `stdint.h` as specified by the
standard, while the `bits/stdint-intn.h` and `bits/alltypes.h` internal headers
are just implementation details.

This is why binding specifications allow you to specify more than one header
where a type is defined.  Recall the relevant part of the binding specification
for the `int32_t` type.  This works with both `glibc` and Musl, using
`#include <inttypes.h>` or `#include <stdint.h>`.

```yaml
ctypes:
  - headers:
      - inttypes.h
      - stdint.h
    cname: int32_t
    hsname: Int32
```

> [!NOTE]
> Most types are provided by a single header.  We therefore support syntax like
> `- headers: uchar.h` for this common case.

It is possible that you will have to deal with internal headers when generating
bindings for other libraries.  Suppose that we want to create bindings for a
game library that has the following headers.

* [`game_internal.h`][source:game_internal.h] is an internal header that
  declares a `game_state` type.

    ```c
    typedef struct game_state_details *game_state;
    ```

* [`game_world.h`][source:game_world.h] is a public header the uses the
  `game_state` type.

    ```c
    #include "game_internal.h"

    void move_world(game_state v);
    ```

* [`game_player.h`][source:game_player.h] is another public header that uses the
  `game_state` type.

    ```c
    #include "game_internal.h"

    void move_player(game_state v);
    ```

We do not want to refer to internal header `game_internal.h` directly in the
bindings, but that header defines a type that is part of the public API.  As in
the vector library example, defining distinct `Game_state` types in `Game.World`
and `Game.Player` modules would result in modules that do not work well
together.  A single `Game_state` type should be used by both of these modules.

One solution is to generate bindings for `game_state` in a separate
`Game.State` module.  The bindings should not refer to `game_internal.h` since
it is an internal module.  For example, renaming that header should not break
the bindings.  The bindings should instead specify that the type is provided by
both of the public headers.

This can be done using the following CLI `preprocess` command.  It only passes
the `game_world.h` and `game_player.h` headers as inputs, so only those headers
are specified in the generated binding specification.  Internal headers should
never be passed as inputs.

```
hs-bindgen-cli preprocess \
    -I c \
    --create-output-dirs \
    --overwrite-files \
    --unique-id com.hs-bindgen.manual.game \
    --select-by-header-path 'game_internal\.h$' \
    --hs-output-dir hs/hs-game/generated \
    --gen-binding-spec binding-specs/game.yaml \
    --module Game.State \
    game_world.h \
    game_player.h
```

The `--select-by-header-path 'game_internal\.h$'` option causes `hs-bindgen` to
only generate bindings for declarations in the `game_internal.hs` header.
Note that bindings for all declarations in that header are generated.

If you would like to instead only generate bindings for declarations in the
internal header that are needed, `--select-by-decl-name` selection predicates
may be used. In the following example, two predicates are specified to emphasize
that names are matched using regular expressions. A single predicate with
regular expression `game_state` would match both of these declarations, but that
could obfuscate the details.

```
hs-bindgen-cli preprocess \
    -I c \
    --create-output-dirs \
    --overwrite-files \
    --unique-id com.hs-bindgen.manual.game \
    --select-by-decl-name '^game_state$' \
    --select-by-decl-name '^struct game_state_details$' \
    --hs-output-dir hs/hs-game/generated \
    --gen-binding-spec binding-specs/game.yaml \
    --module Game.State \
    game_world.h \
    game_player.h
```

## Reference

### Binding specification files

Binding specification files may be in YAML or JSON format.  This manual shows
examples in YAML format.

#### `version`

Description
: Version metadata for the binding specification

Type
: Object, with fixed keys

Example:

```yaml
version:
  hs_bindgen: 0.5.2
  binding_specification: '3.1'
```

Key `hs_bindgen` maps to the version of `hs-bindgen` that the binding
specification was created for.  The value must be a string.  It can be helpful
when debugging, and it may even affect the way that the file is parsed, in order
to implement compatibility.

Key `binding_specification` maps to the binding specification version.  The
value must be a string, so it must be quoted when using YAML format to
distinguish it from a number.  The version is in `MAJOR.MINOR` format, and it is
used to implement compatibility, as follows.

* Each release of `hs-bindgen` is associated with a specific binding
  specification version, referred to as the
  *current binding specification version*.  Run `hs-bindgen-cli --version` to
  see that version.
* By default, `hs-bindgen` uses *strict binding specification compatibility*.
  It can load any binding specification that has the same major version and a
  minor version that is not greater than the current minor version.  It may be
  able to load binding a specification with a smaller major version, as
  determined by the changes between those versions.
* Users may optionally use *allow-newer binding specification compatibility*
  instead.  CLI users can use the `--binding-spec-allow-newer` option for this.
  It can load any binding specification that has the same major version, even if
  the minor version is greater than the current minor version.

In this example, the binding specification version is `3.1`.  The binding
specification was created using `hs-bindgen` version `0.5.2`, and it has the
following compatibility:

* Using strict compatibility, it can be loaded by any version of `hs-bindgen`
  associated with binding specification version `3.1` or `3.*` where the minor
  version is greater than 1.
* Using allow-newer compatibility, it can *also* be loaded by any version of
  `hs-bindgen` associated with binding specification version `3.0`.
* With either compatibility mode, it may be loaded by a version of `hs-bindgen`
  associated with a binding specification version where the major version is
  greater than 3, as determined by implementation details for the version.
* It may not be loaded by any version of associated with a binding specification
  version where the major version is less than 3.

#### `hsmodule`

Description
: Module that the binding specification describes

Type
: String (optional)

Example:

```yaml
hsmodule: Vector
```

Note that the fully-qualified module name should be specified, as used in an
`import` declaration.

When a binding specification is used as a prescriptive binding specification,
to guide the generation of bindings, specifying the module is optional.  When
used as an external binding specification, to specify imported types, specifying
the module is required.

In this example, the binding specification describes bindings in module
`Vector`.

#### `ctypes`

Description
: Mapping from C types to Haskell types

Type
: Array of omittable C type specifications

Example:

```yaml
ctypes:
  - headers: vector.h
    cname: struct vector
    hsname: Vector
```

C types specifications map a C type to a Haskell type using an object.

Key `headers` specifies one or more headers that provide the C type.  In most
cases, a type is provided by a single header, in which case the value can be
specified as a string.  When a type is provided my multiple headers, the value
should be an array of strings.  Each string should specify the header as written
in a `#include` argument (without brackets or quotes).

Key `cname` specifies the name of the C type, as a string.  This is generally
the name as written in C, but special syntax is used for types that are not
given names in C.  See the section on [C names][manual:c-names] for details.
When a binding specification is used as prescriptive binding specification, to
guide the generation of bindings, a warning is emitted if a C name is not used.

Key `hsname` specifies the name of the corresponding Haskell type, as a string.
It is optional, and a Haskell name is generated based on the C name if one is
not specified.  It is required when the Haskell type is specified in `hstypes`,
however.  In particular, any binding specification used as an external binding
specification must specify `hsname`s.

More than one C type can be mapped to the same Haskell type.  Declaration
`typedef struct pt { int x, y; } point;` introduces two C types, which are
mapped to two Haskell types by default: a record type named `Pt` corresponding
to the `struct` and a `newtype` named `Point` corresponding to the `typedef`.
By mapping both of the C types to the same Haskell type, a single Haskell type
is used for both C types.

In this example, C type `struct vector`, provided by header `vector.h`, is
mapped to Haskell type `Vector`.

To omit a type, specify the `headers` and `cname` of the type in an `omit`
object.  With the following, bindings for C type `struct foo`, provided by
headers `acme.h` and `foo.h`, are not generated.

```yaml
ctypes:
  - omit:
      headers:
        - acme.h
        - foo.h
      cname: struct foo
```

C `enum`s do not *really* define new types; they merely give names to some
values of the parent type.  However, in some applications *users* may know that
the values declared for a specific `enum` are the only ones possible.  Key
`enum` allows users to explicitly distinguish these cases:

* `open` specifies that a C `enum` may have values others than those declared.
  This is the default.

    ```yaml
    - headers: acme.h
      cname: enum foo
      enum: open
    ```

* `closed` specifies that the declared values are the only valid values of a C
  `enum`.  In this case, `hs-bindgen` generates a `COMPLETE` pragma for the
  declared patterns.

    ```yaml
    - headers: acme.h
      cname: enum bar
      enum: closed
    ```

It is invalid to specify `enum` for a non-`enum` type.  In this case, a warning
is emitted and the `enum` specification is ignored.

#### `hstypes`

Description
: Properties of Haskell types

Type
: Array of Haskell type specifications

Example:

```yaml
hstypes:
- hsname: Vector
  representation:
    record:
      constructor: Vector
      fields:
      - vector_x
      - vector_y
  instances:
  - Eq
  - Generic
  - HasCField
  - HasField
  - ReadRaw
  - Show
  - StaticSize
  - Storable
  - WriteRaw
```

Haskell type specifications are specified using an object.

Key `hsname` is the Haskell type name, as a string.  Every `hsname` must be
mapped to from a C type in `ctypes`.  This allows `hs-bindgen` to check that
every Haskell type specification is used, making it easy to alert users of
typos in Haskell names that may otherwise go unnoticed and lead to bugs.

Key `representation` specifies the representation of the Haskell type.  Four
types of representations are supported:

* Representation `record` is used for `struct` and `union` types.  Use string
  `record` to just assert the representation, or specify the following record
  properties in a `record` object:
    * Key `constructor` specifies the constructor name, as a string.
    * Key `fields` specifies the field names, as an array of strings.  All
      fields must be specified, in order.

* Representation `newtype` is used for `typedef`, `enum`, and `macro` types.
  Use string `newtype` to just assert the representation, or specify the
  following `newtype` properties in a `newtype` object:
    * Key `constructor` specifies the constructor name, as a string.
    * Key `fields` specifies the field name, as an array of strings.  Exactly
      one field must be specified.

* Representation `emptydata` is used to represent a type using a `data` type
  with no constructors.  This is useful when the corresponding C type exposes
  internal implementation details, and it should only used via pointers.  The
  standard `FILE` type is a good example.  Use string `emptydata` to select this
  representation; there are no options.

* (*not implemented yet*)
  Representation `typealias` is used to create a type alias using `type`.  This
  is useful if you want to map a C `typedef` type to the same Haskell type of
  the wrapped type, yet you want to distinguish the different name using a type
  alias.  Use string `typealias` to select his representation; there are no
  options.

Specifying the representation is optional.

Key `instances` is used to specify details about type class instances that are
derived/generated for the type, as an array of omittable instance
specifications.  Only instances of a fixed set of type classes can be
derived/generated, per each kind of C type (`struct`, `union`, `enum`, and
`typedef`/macro type).  Use `hs-bindgen-cli info instances` to see what
instances are supported.  This also shows which instances are derived/generated
by default.

Instances are specified as follows:

* The name of a type class as a string specifies that an instance of that type
  class is derived/generated.  In the following, an instance of the `Show` type
  class is derived/generated.

    ```yaml
    hstypes:
      - hsname: Foo
        instances:
          - Show
    ```

* To omit an instance, specify the name of the type class as a string in an
  `omit` object.  In the following, an instance of the `Show` type class is not
  derived/generated.

    ```yaml
    hstypes:
      - hsname: Foo
        instances:
          - omit: Show
    ```

* (*not implemented yet, see [issue #1766][issue:1766]*)
  Instances are derived/generated using the following strategies:

    * `hs-bindgen` indicates that `hs-bindgen` determines how to derive or
      generate the instance.
    * `newtype` indicates that the instance should be derived using using the
      GHC `newtype` strategy (`GeneralizedNewtypeDeriving`).
    * `stock` indicates that the instance should be derived using the GHC
      `stock` strategy.

  When an instance supports being derived/generated using more than one
  strategy, the desired strategy can be specified in an instance specification
  object, where the type class is specified using key `class` and the strategy
  is specified using key `strategy`.  In the following example, an instance of
  the `Show` type class is derived using the `newtype` strategy.

    ```yaml
    hstypes:
      - hsname: Foo
        instances:
          - class: Show
            strategy: newtype
    ```

* (*not implemented yet, see [issue #648][issue:648]*)
  In some cases, one needs to define an instance by hand.  That cannot be done
  if the instance is derived/generated.  One can omit the instance, but then
  other instances that depend on the instance are not derived/generated, leading
  to the need to define many instances by hand.  This is avoided by generating
  instances with constraints.  Instances with constraints are only generated if
  the instance is explicitly required in a prescriptive binding specification.
  Constraints are specified in an instance specification object, where the type
  class is specified using key `class` and the constraints are specified using
  key `constraints`, as a list of objects with the following keys.

    * `class` specifies the constraint class, as a string.
    * `hsmodule` specifies the module of the type argument, as a string.
    * `hsname` specifies the name of the type argument, as a string.

  If any constraints for an instance are listed, then all of them must be
  listed.  In the following example, an instance of the `Show` type class is
  derived using the `stock` strategy with a `Show Some.Module.Foo` constraint.

    ```yaml
    hstypes:
      - hsname: Bar
        instances:
          - class: Show
            strategy: stock
            constraints:
              - class: Show
                hsmodule: Some.Module
                hsname: Foo
    ```

When using a binding specification as a prescriptive binding specification,
to guide the generation of bindings, specifying instances is optional.  One
must specify instances to deviate from defaults, and one can specify instances
to assert that the instances are derived/generated as desired.

When using a binding specification as an external binding specification, to
specify imported types, a complete specification of instances and strategies is
required because that information is needed to derive/generate instances for
types that use the external bindings.



<!-- sources and references -->

[issue:1776]: https://github.com/well-typed/hs-bindgen/issues/1766
[issue:648]: https://github.com/well-typed/hs-bindgen/issues/648
[manual:c-names]: ../c-names.md
[source:game_internal.h]: ../../c/game_internal.h
[source:game_player.h]: ../../c/game_player.h
[source:game_world.h]: ../../c/game_world.h
[source:vector.c]: ../../c/vector.c
[source:vector.h]: ../../c/vector.h
[source:vector_length.c]: ../../c/vector_length.c
[source:vector_length.h]: ../../c/vector_length.h
[source:vector_rotate.c]: ../../c/vector_rotate.c
[source:vector_rotate.h]: ../../c/vector_rotate.h
